Every once in a while you come across an idea, where you need for a way to store large amount of log data and other information for your Arduino project, for example a GPS logger.

The solution is to use what’s found in every digital camera and mp3 player: Flash Cards! often called SD or micro SD cards. Their ability to pack GigaBytes of data into a space smaller than a coin made them indispensable thing in our life.

Hardware Overview
The micro SD card module contains two main components that make it undoubtedly easy to add data logging to your next Arduino project:

Micro SD TF Card Module module contains level shifter and regulator
The operating voltage of any standard micro SD Cards is 3.3 V. So we cannot directly connect it to circuits that use 5V logic. In fact, any voltages exceeding 3.6V will permanently damage the micro SD card. That’s why; the module has an onboard ultra-low dropout regulator that will convert voltages from 3.3V – 6V down to ~3.3V.
There’s also a 74LVC125A chip on the module which converts the interface logic from 3.3V-5V to 3.3V. This is called logic level shifting. That means you can use this board to interact with both 3.3V and 5V microcontrollers like Arduino.
There are actually two ways to interface with micro SD cards – SPI mode and SDIO mode. SDIO mode is way faster and is used in mobile phones, digital cameras etc. But it is more complex and requires signing non-disclosure documents. For that reason, hobbyist like us will likely never encounter SDIO mode interface code. Instead, every SD card module is based on ‘lower speed & less overhead’ SPI mode that is easy for any microcontroller to use.

Micro SD Card Module Pinout
The micro SD card module is fairly simple to connect. It has six pins:

Micro SD TF Card Module Pinout SPI
VCC pin supplies power for the module and should be connected to 5V pin on the Arduino.

GND should be connected to the ground of Arduino.

MISO (Master In Slave Out) is SPI output from the Micro SD Card Module.

MOSI (Master Out Slave In) is SPI input to the Micro SD Card Module.

SCK (Serial Clock) pin accepts clock pulses which synchronize data transmission generated by Arduino.

SS (Slave Select) pin is used by Arduino(Master) to enable and disable specific devices on SPI bus.

Preparing the micro SD card
Before you insert the micro SD card into the module and hook it up to the Arduino, you must properly format the card. For the Arduino library we’ll be discussing, and nearly every other SD library, the card must be formatted FAT16 or FAT32.

If you have a new SD card, chances are it’s already pre-formatted with a FAT file system. However you may have problems with how the factory formats the card, or if it’s an old card it needs to be reformatted. Either way, it’s always good idea to format the card before using, even if it’s new!

We strongly recommend you use the official SD card formatter utility – written by the SD association it solves many problems that come with bad formatting! Download the formatter and run it on your computer, just select the right drive and click FORMAT.

SD Formatter Screenshot
Wiring – Connecting Micro SD Card Module to Arduino
Now that your card is ready to use, we can wire up the micro SD breakout board!

To start with, insert the micro SD card module into the breadboard. Connect VCC pin on the module to 5V on the Arduino and GND pin to ground. Now we are remaining with the pins that are used for SPI communication.

As micro SD cards require a lot of data transfer, they will give the best performance when connected up to the hardware SPI pins on a microcontroller. The hardware SPI pins are much faster than ‘bit-banging’ the interface code using another set of pins.

Note that each Arduino Board has different SPI pins which should be connected accordingly. For Arduino boards such as the UNO/Nano those pins are digital 13 (SCK), 12 (MISO) and 11 (MOSI). You will also need a fourth pin for the ‘chip/slave select’ (SS) line. Usually this is pin 10 but you can actually use any pin you like.
